Tim Downey
APL Dyalog Journal
2-16-2012

Entry 2:

1.  Covered for this entry:

At the time of writing this entry I have finished Chapter C of 
Mastering Dyalog and have practiced with the APL expression for
tiling an array.  Chapter C focused on the primitive functions of
Dyalog APL and how they are evalutated.

2.  What I found interesting:

Being but a few chapters in, the most interesting aspects
of Dyalog APL for me have been its capacity to handle data and the
sheer simplicity of interacting with it.  Tools such as reduction and
the pervasiveness of scalar functions appear to accomplish a great
deal of work for what seems to be very little code written on the
programmer's part.  Additionally, when I was practicing with the array
tiling expression, a friend walked in and noticed that I was constructing
a matrix by tiling other matrices.  He was impressed with himself
for gathering that with a quick glance and I was impressed with myself
for constructing it with just a few characters!  There was just a whole
lot of self-esteem boosting going on and I have APL to thank for that.

3. Difficulties:

Right now, my main difficulties lie with learning what the symbols do,
axes as operators, and dealing with the shapes and types of data.  For
me, it was a bit confusing how the axis was used as an operator.  I think
my problem is that I view [2] as an index of sorts and expect it to 
come after the matrix (example: Prod[3]).  I know that refers to something
else, however, and that the [2] is just an operator in itself.  Still,
it's just something that I found myself confused with.

Also, I am a bit unclear on user defined functions, but I assume that
topic will be elaborated on at a later time.

4. What I Found Easy:

The chapter in a whole was pretty easy to understand.  Any issues I had
were just the result of a lack of practice and there were no major
conceptual issues.

5. Impressions:

Like I mentioned earlier, I am excited about APL and think that it has
some really interesting things to offer.  Dyalog APL seems like a language
with real, practical uses and the fact that I could see myself potentially
using it in the future is definitely a motivating factor.  For the most part,
the Dyalog IDE is simple to use and I enjoy the REPL-like aspects of it.

6. Dislikes:

Really, so far my only major dislike is that at times my keyboard shortcuts
stop working in the IDE and I have to save and restart to get them back.
It says that my keyboard configuration has changed and when I go to see if
I'm on the UK configuration or something it says I am on the US configuration
and that everything is normal.  It's not a major problem, but it is definitely
and annoyance.

Also, I dislike how sometimes in the text they will mention variables that
are supposed to be defined in the tutorial work spaces.  Many of these
seem to be missing and it wouldn't be a big deal if the text defined them.
Usually they do, but sometimes they just write the first few bits and put
an ellipses.

I don't really have any major dislikes with the language itself thus far, just
these minor gripes about the IDE and the book.

7. Code:

I haven't written any of my own code so far.  I've just been playing around
with the matrix tiling expression that you provided and doing the exercises in
the book.  I've uploaded my workspace for this chapter, though.  It is titled:
2012-02-16.dws

The matrix tiling expression is stored in a function called TiledMatrix.