Tim Downey
APL Dyalog Journal
2-21-2012

Entry 3:

1.  Covered for this entry:

In this entry I have covered the first half of Chapter D
in Mastering Dyalog APL (pages 147-186).  These pages covered 
the creation of some simple user defined functions and introduced
flow control in APL.

2.  What I found interesting:

I was surprised with the built in code editing features of the IDE.
I had never realized it before, but I was impressed with how the IDE
displayed the code contained within a defined function just by hovering
the mouse over it.  Additionally, I thought it was nice that there was
a built-in text editor that could edit these functions just by clicking on
them.

Additionally, I found the sections on flow control interesting, mainly due to
the existence of the :GoTo keyword.  I have never actually done anything
with GoTo and I know that in Java that it is a reserved keyword, but cannot
actually be used.  This was just something that intrigued me.

3. Difficulties:

My primary difficulty with APL so far has just been with my ability to read
and understand the code.  The examples in the book so far are all simple and
easy enough to understand, but when I encounter something such as the 
"Game of Life" function I have difficulties.  To me the code just looks like
a string of hieroglyphs and I find myself missing the verbosity of other
languages.  Writing APL, however, is not nearly as difficult.  In fact, I find
that in order to understand an expression it is faster for me to just rewrite 
it from scratch, adding each operator/function as necessary and seeing what 
happens.

I did spend a while working through the first few exercises that were
presented in the chapter.  Although they were fairly trivial, I found that
I needed to go back and reread parts of chapters B and C to complete them.

4. What I Found Easy:

The information on flow control has been easy enough to understand.  It was
refreshing to learn something that was more familiar to me.  I've encountered
most of the different kinds of conditionals and loops already in Java and
Actionscript so it was basically just an exercise in learning the syntactical
differences.

5. Impressions:

Upon seeing the GoTo keyword I was compelled to research the history of APL
a bit and I was surprised to see that APL first appeared in 1964 and that it
stood for "A Programming Language."  I found that interesting, but other than
that I do not have any new impressions since the last journal entry.

6. Dislikes:

Again I've just been frustrated with the IDE losing keyboard support.  I still
have yet to figure out why this occurs and it is becoming a major annoyance.

Additionally, I am finding myself starting to dislike the symbols.  Though it
is probably due to my own inexperience with APL I find complicated expressions
confusing as I mentioned earlier.

7. Code:

There has been no code written other than what was required for the exercises
D1 through D10.  This can all be found within the Masterying Dyalog text.